[Skip to main content](https://www.cmu.edu/leadership/the-provost/campus-comms/10-01-25-1#main-content)

# Support Carnegie Mellon’s 32nd Annual Food Drive

_October 1, 2025_

Dear Members of the CMU Community:

For more than three decades, our CMU community has been showing care and concern for our neighbors in need of food in the greater Pittsburgh area. Today we are excited to kick off the **32nd Annual Food Drive**, organized and sponsored by Staff Council.

Coming together to support Greater Pittsburgh Community Food Bank is not only a chance to provide meals and resources, but also to strengthen a bond between our campus and the community that sustains us. Each year, it is a delight to see our students, faculty and staff unite to make a meaningful difference in addressing food insecurity in our region. According to the Food Bank, CMU organizes the highest-grossing food drive of any organization in the city of Pittsburgh!

Our goals this year are to raise **$100,000** and gather **nonperishable food items** (especially peanut butter) for the Food Bank. We also aim to collect **250 can openers** for the CMU Food Pantry. The 2025 drive runs through **Saturday, Nov. 8**.

[**Donate to the Food Drive**](https://click.connect.cmu.edu/?qs=92ffd90e76d1d6f586b3bfa87a3ba27488ead78319edd83473133a441b13ad1d5c5551d1c3e37c03b603b4b4afabea9149d805bb9e1ee9aac2ff9f5ef5831f9d)

Bring a donation to the following events for the chance to win prizes:

- **Tartan Tuesdays** (students only)

Tuesdays, Oct. 7 and 21, noon-5 p.m., Alumni House
- **Food Drive Fall Fest**

Wednesday, Oct. 29, noon-2 p.m., Merson Courtyard
- **Benefits & Fitness Fair**

Wednesday, Nov. 5, 10 a.m.-2 p.m., Cohon University Center Second Floor

Or drop off your nonperishable food and can opener donations here:

- **Drive & Drop**

Tuesday, Oct. 21, 11 a.m.-1 p.m., East Campus Garage

Nonperishables can also be dropped off at the Parking Office during business hours any day.

Visit the [Staff Council Food Drive web page](https://click.connect.cmu.edu/?qs=92ffd90e76d1d6f5cfd10b71891a4bb715e25140596baf37fc21fb2a3b8e8f034028355eaf1c61605498bb3dfc75f091cc41e572134c3fc880124c5bb980a0f6) for more details, and contact [Carole Panno](mailto:cp1g@andrew.cmu.edu) with questions.

Thank you in advance for your continued generosity!

Sincerely,

Jim Garrett

Provost and Chief Academic Officer

Honorary Chair of the 2025 CMU Food Drive

Carole Panno

Associate Director of Development, University Advancement

Staff Council Food Drive Committee Chair

|     |     |
| --- | --- |
|  |  |
