[Skip to main content](https://www.cmu.edu/leadership/the-provost/campus-comms/05-14-25#main-content)

# Reappointment of Keith Webster as the Helen and Henry Posner, Jr. Dean of the University Libraries

_May 14, 2025_

Dear Members of the Carnegie Mellon University Community,

I am delighted to announce the reappointment of [Keith Webster](https://library.cmu.edu/about/people/keith-webster) as the Helen and Henry Posner, Jr. Dean of the University Libraries.

Since his appointment in July 2013, Dean Webster, who also serves as director of emerging and integrative media initiatives, has demonstrated exceptional leadership and a visionary approach to the evolving role of the University Libraries. His contributions have enabled us to modernize both our library services and spaces, meeting the changing needs of 21st-century learners and enriching the Carnegie Mellon experience for all. This reappointment comes at an exciting time, especially following the recent announcement of the Posner Foundation of Pittsburgh’s $8 million commitment to support the CMU Libraries Special Collections, which will enrich and enhance the Libraries' impact.

Under Dean Webster’s leadership, University Libraries has expanded its role to support digital scholarship, open access initiatives and the integration of new services, such as the recent centralization of all Carnegie Mellon University Press activities within the Libraries. He has also been instrumental in establishing the Sustainability Studio at Hunt Library, further establishing the Libraries as a central hub for university-wide initiatives. Dean Webster has actively shaped the university's leadership landscape by serving on successful search committees for key academic positions.

Dean Webster’s career reflects a deep and extensive commitment to the field of library and information science. His expertise is widely recognized through his significant global leadership roles, professorships, fellowships, and service on numerous boards and societies. We are fortunate to have his experience and vision guiding the University Libraries at CMU.

I would like to thank everyone in our community who assisted in the evaluation process, including the evaluation ad hoc committee, for their thorough review and valuable recommendations. Its members included:

- **Chair:** Joelle Pitts, Senior Associate Dean of the University Libraries
- **Outside Dean:** Mike Trick, Dean of Carnegie Mellon University in Qatar
- Sayeed Choudhury, Associate Dean for Digital Infrastructure, University Libraries
- Kim Dolan, Head of Resource and Discovery Services, University Libraries
- Melanie Gainey, STEM Librarian and Director of Open Science Program, University Libraries
- Rebecca Nugent, Head, Department of Statistics and Data Science and Professor of Statistics and Data Science, Dietrich College of Humanities and Social Sciences
- Shannon Riffe, Associate Dean for External Relations, University Libraries
- Josh Sunshine, Director, REUSE Program and Assistant Professor of Software and Societal Systems, School of Computer Science
- Sarah Young, Social Sciences Librarian and Director of Evidence Synthesis Program, University Libraries
- Shelley Anna, Vice Provost for Faculty (ex-officio)

Please join me in congratulating Keith on his reappointment and in expressing our gratitude for his continued dedication to Carnegie Mellon University.

Sincerely,

James H. Garrett Jr.

Provost and Chief Academic Officer

|     |     |
| --- | --- |
|  |  |
