[Skip to main content](https://www.cmu.edu/work-that-matters/energy-innovation/cmu-startup-speeding-grid-innovation#main-content)

# The CMU Startup Speeding Grid Innovation

A CMU start-up uses insights from chip design to revolutionize the U.S. electric grid.

**Why it matters:** The lengthy and time-consuming studies necessary before adding new, renewable power sources to the nation’s grid is one of the key challenges to meeting the AI-driven demand in energy growth. This process leads to an interconnection queue backlog that bottlenecks efforts to improve grid reliability and resilience. The CMU-grown startup [Pearl Street Technologies](https://pearlstreettechnologies.com/) helps to cut that process so developers and utilities can add more power, faster.

**Catch up quick:** [Larry Pileggi](https://users.ece.cmu.edu/~pileggi/), head of Carnegie Mellon’s Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, is a global leader in the design automation of very large integrated circuits (ICs), or chips.

- While the North American power grid is very complicated, a few years ago Pileggi realized that it is not as complicated as the systems with billions of transistors on chips he had been analyzing.
- Using their know-how from ICs, he and his graduate students built a platform called SUGAR that has become a leading tool for the analysis and optimization of power systems.

**How it works:** SUGAR uses the design and simulation tools from the computer chip industry to reduce months of power system engineering effort to minutes.

- Development projects to incorporate new forms of electricity generation, particularly via renewables such as solar energy, once required several months of study, which creates a significant backlog for implementation.
- One cannot simply build a solar farm and connect it to the grid. It is necessary to first build a model of the grid and simulate how it will behave when the solar farm is added. These analyses must consider all possible scenarios for the new grid, which can be a daunting task.

SUGAR can perform simulations and optimization in hours, accomplishing what might otherwise require a team of engineers working for six months or more. The technology has other grid planning applications as well, including:

- Transmission expansion planning
- Extreme event analysis
- Base case creation

David Rosner, commissioner of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC), praised SUGAR in [a letter](https://www.ferc.gov/news-events/news/commissioner-rosners-letters-isosrtos-regarding-interconnection-automation#_ftn1) highlighting interconnection automation software platforms, specifically referring to a planning study that was performed for a large region of the U.S. transmission grid:

_“One application reproduced the manual study of a large interconnection cluster — which took nearly two years to complete — in just 10 days and arrived at largely similar results.”_

Enverus, which offers a platform for the management, development, and acquisition of the entire energy value chain, announced its [acquisition of Pearl Street](https://www.ece.cmu.edu/news-and-events/story/2025/03/enverus-acquires-pearl-street-technologies.html) earlier this year.

**The big picture:** At Carnegie Mellon, we are committed to accelerating research to commercialization. We spin off companies that can move engineering forward in ways that directly benefit society — developing practical solutions.

- Nowhere is this more important than at the intersection of AI and energy.
- As Pearl Street shows, it’s not just providing the energy for AI. It’s also using AI for energy — to develop and deploy environmental responsibility and economically feasible solutions.
- CMU's global leadership in design, engineering and systems of AI enable our researchers, founders, and students to bring a new lens to the biggest energy challenges.

|     |     |
| --- | --- |
|  |  |
